General O.D. Butler.
Today is August 8th, 1980. This is the third
interview with General Butler. This is Terry
Anderson and this is a test.
This is the third interview with General O.D.
Butler. Today is August 8th, 1980. This is Terry
Anderson. During the last two interviews, we've
discussed your early years, your education here
at Texas A&M, and your active and some of your
reserve duty in the Army. I'd like to turn now to the
commands in the reserve that you've had and also to
the attitudes and opinions on leadership and
other aspects of military life. In 1955, you were
the commander of the 343 Field Artillery
Battalion. Why were you chosen?
Well, I can't say exactly why. I
was a fairly young major.
Came back and immediately resumed activities in
the Army Reserve in the early days, 1946, 47, even
before the policy was established that there
would be inactive duty pay for reserves of course
our reserve activities prior to world war ii were
voluntary and unpaid right so i was in activities
there i suppose i had been one of the most
consistent in participation over a long period of
time had some seniority that was your first
command wasn't it Well, it was the first
battalion. Battalion command, right. Battery
commander. Right, but I mean that was your first
battalion-sized command. Yes, it was. What were
your functions and duties? Well,
a battalion of field artillery has a combat
mission to support the infantry, our tank
battalions.
We attempted to carry that out. The battalion has
three firing batteries equipped with pouchers, a
headquarters battery, and a service battery. So
there were five
battery-sized units. Commander The Army said
that the commander is responsible for everything
his unit does or fails to do, so that's a summary of
what you do as a commander. Okay, what did you do
with the battalion? All right, the battalion
was responsible for training
for all of the table of organization, authorized
positions,
and responsible for maintaining the
functionality of the substantial equipment that
one has in a unit. So we would make out, of course,
the objectives of training for a year. conduct the
training and try to bring all of the unit members up
to a maximum level of training prior to our two
weeks of active duty for training, where we would
go to an Army post and perform functions as any
active Army unit would by those periods. How many
men did you have, full strength? Oh, full
strength. Of a battalion there would be something
over 500 men. 500 men and what type of equipment did
you have? We had 105 millimeter howitzers.
Towed.
How many 105's? Well actually for training we had
two per firing battery. At that time we did not have
full strength units. That's all we needed for
training and when we would go to active duty we
could draw additional houses from the units on the
post where we were assigned if we needed them in
addition to our own houses. Where was your
headquarters? Headquarters was right here at
College Station.
In 1955, as I recall, we had just prepared the old
Marion Pugh Lumber Company warehouse the
government leased and we used that for a
headquarters building. It was later converted to
apartments after the U.S. Army Reserve Center was
built on Carson Street between Color Station
Bryan and the city limits of Bryan.
Now in 1959 you changed command. You became the CEO
of the 4th Howitzer Battalion. Why'd you change
duty? We didn't change duty. That was just a
redesignation of the same organization. Were you
still a major at that time? I don't know. It seemed
to me like I'd been promoted in the meanwhile.
Actually, I commanded that battalion
prior to 1951. I was a battalion commander when I
went to do graduate work at Michigan State
University in 1951. And
I was a major at that time, but I got promoted to
lieutenant colonel somewhere along in the middle
50's. That's on the record there somewhere. I know
I was kind of resentful. I commanded that
battalion for three years as a major. And the
Artillery, I mean the active army advisor
assigned to us never recommended me for a
promotion because he said I was too young to be
promoted. I was a little resentful of that at the
time, but it later proved to be an advantage. Well,
according to your biographical sketch, you first
became the commander in 1955. Well, 897th.
Headquarters, 75th. You see in clear up here,
352nd Armored Field Artillery Battalion. 49 to
51. So that's when I first became a battalion
commander. 1 July, 49. Okay.
Now, how did you change from artillery to
engineering? Okay, that was because the 90th
Infantry Division, U.S. Army Reserve,
was deactivated. It was during the McNamara era
when he was the
Secretary of Defense. They changed policies and
decided to emphasize combat units in the National
Guard and combat support units in the Army
Reserve. So the 90th Infantry Division was
deactivated and all of us in 90th Infantry
Division units that wanted to be were reassigned
to other Army Reserve units to vacancies if they
existed. If not, we were assigned as over strength
So I was first assigned as an over-strength
officer to the 420th engineer brigade.
What was your opinion of McNamara?
Well, I thought he had a lot of genius, surrounded
himself with brilliant people, sort of think tank
group people. Though I thought at the time, and
still believe that this probably was a mistake,
that it weakened the Tova Reserve structure to
concentrate, to make the changes that were made at
that time. Did the Cold War and the
Soviet-American tensions of the 1950s have
anything to do with our effect in any way, the
reserves?
Well, sure.
One Cold War effect
that is advantageous to reserves is an actual
draft or threat of a draft that would cause young
people to choose between the possibility or
probability of doing their service in the active
forces are satisfying their requirement by
membership in the reserves. To me, that's the main
way that the reserves gain adequate support,
recruiting, get the kind of talent required to be
effective. Then during the 1950s, when you were in
command, you did not have problems with reserve or
getting volunteers? Well at that particular time
with the Korean War and the draft as I recall we had a
fairly substantial waiting list in all of our
organizations so we could be very selective. And
how would you select a potential officer or a
potential enlisted man? Well actually the
officers were selected by an entirely different
method. Of course, at that time, we had access to a
number of officers, and we looked at their
qualifications for the vacancy we had, their
military occupational specialty and their
previous record. And of course, you can check
those with the officer's efficiency report,
which were required. Those reports were required
and still are. wasn't too difficult to select the
highest qualified officers. Now for enlisted
men, of course, we
selected them based upon their scores on their
tests for
recruitment, upon their desires to train. If they
wanted to do certain specialties, let's say
communications for which we had some vacancies
and were willing to go to school to take those, we'd
naturally get preference for that. As I recall at
that time too, we were fortunate in being able to
utilize the ROTC cadets
it was very advantageous for the ROTC cadet to be in
the Army reserves, because if they had three years
of good service with the reserves prior to their
being commissioned, they would automatically
collect the longevity pay, which as I recall
amounted to about $75 a month, and so they could
start out higher. Of course, this would be an
advantage all the time they were associated with
the Army. And besides that, Obviously, they had an
orientation toward the military, or they
wouldn't have been in Texas A&M. They wouldn't
have taken advance to ROTC, so they were the very
best soldiers we could get.
Now, you became the commander of the 420th in 1971.
Do you remember what your aims were? Aims?
I wanted to have the best engineer brigade in the
Army Reserves and one of the very best Army Reserve
military organizations. Okay, how did you go
about that? Well, in the first place, a brigade
headquarters like this could be very, very well
supported around Texas A&M University because
there are so many highly qualified and motivated
reservists in this area.
I was not a qualified engineer, so naturally I
leaned heavily on selection of highly qualified
engineers and gave them the maximum authority and
responsibility I could. I leaned on their
expertise to do the job. The main thing I would do
for the different sections is to set their goals
and help to select steps objectives and steps for
achievement of these goals and objectives,
whatever they might be. We had high demands on
performance, and people that didn't come up to
these standards, we'd try to find a better one to do
that. What type of operations did you go on? Well,
this was a wonderful experience. An engineer
brigade like this, this one had two construction
battalions and two combat battalions. And we
could have home station projects for
construction that would allow us to exercise all
of the skills and utilize the equipment, as long as
we worked for
public service type units. For instance, we could
construct things for Texas A&M University Did
you? Oh, yes, we did some. For example? We had a
utility detachment
right here at the headquarters. A utility
detachment does the same sort of things on an Army
post as the Office of Physical Plants does at Texas
A&M. We affiliated the utility detachment with
the carpenters, plumbers, electricians, et
cetera, at Texas A&M. We built some things, for
instance, out at the Farmers Training School.
quite a bit of activity there. And over the years,
we've also done civic projects for the city of
Bryan. We rehabilitated an old school house
out on Highway 21, Dilley Shaw Tap Road, that's
used for a mental health, mental retardation
facility. We had a number of projects like that.
Could you give me some specific examples of
projects, for example, with Bryan and Texas A&M?
Yes, we did construction for the city of Bryan on
Little League Park. Did you really? Yes.
Backstops, hauling dirt, leveling fields,
whatever needed to be done. All of those were
training projects for... Certain sections. And
you do these on weekends? Sure. That's a great
idea. We would have a continuing project. We
probably couldn't accomplish it in one weekend
duty for training, but over a year we'd get quite a
lot done. Now that raises an interesting
question. You're doing work for the university.
You're doing work for the city, which means that
they are not having bids from construction
companies to do that. Yes. What did the
businessmen in the community think of these
projects? Well, they... policy of the Department
of Defense is that the contractors in an area had to
be supportive of these things. Usually we'd work
on projects that were so small that they weren't
really of interest to contractors. But as a part of
our submission of such projects for approval by
Fifth Army headquarters, and they in some cases
might even have to forward projects to Department
of Army for approval, We were required to show
substantial evidence that there was an objection
of the local contractors to what we were gonna do.
That's a good question and it is an important thing
but you know in some cases the same people that
performed these functions on weekends were
contractors themselves. So they Usually we're
acquainted with contractors of different
nature. For instance, Len Stewart, who's now the
commander of the engineer brigade, is one of the
good construction contractors in this area.
Still is. Stewart and Thurmond. He built, for
instance, a new baseball stadium over here that
takes the name University S. Well, that's kind of a
project that his contracting firm is interested
in. Of course, that's out of the question for an
Army Reserve unit to take on training project. But
we could build, for instance, the shelters and
slabs for the Furman's Training School, which we
did in some cases. We could build the ponds around
the animal science area. It's a swine center.
Those are two of the... So the projects then you did
were not major projects, but they were projects
like the Little League Fields. That's very
interesting. Yes. We didn't do everything around
Little League Fields. We would take on, for
instance, the leveling, the grading, the survey.
Of course, we had a fine survey section. I remember
my survey section was the first one to lay out the
polo field on the... photo grounds out here, Texas
A&M, and also our motor graders dump trucks did
some work related to that. We repainted and
rehabilitated one of the homes used by some of the
welfare agencies of the city of Bryan. I see. What
about on your two weeks? excursions. Tell me about
the type of operations you did there. Okay
depending upon whether it was a combat battalion
or a construction battalion. A construction
battalion would work with the post engineer for
instance if we went to Camp Willis near San
Antonio, Texas or to let's say Fort Hood which we
did sometime
we would work well in advance with the post
engineer and be given projects where he would
furnish the materials we would prepare the plans
and do the actual construction and our
requirements were that these projects would
train all of the people in the various military
occupational specialties that we had and would
utilize fully our equipment at the time we were on
the two weeks active duty for training. We went to
Fort Sill, Oklahoma. We went to Albuquerque, New
Mexico. Had an airlift up there one time, moved
construction to construction companies up there
by military airlift. Now was that under your
command or was that under General Hanover's
command? I know he was talking- Hanover was
commanding when we did that particular And you
were his deputy at that time? I was, yes. And did you
continue the airlifts under your command? Well,
we, I'm not sure whether we had an additional one.
We requested airlifts all the way to Germany. We
never got it. Oh, did you really? During our
command, but since then, the brigade has been
authorized,
the Corps Engineer Section, affiliated with
Third Corps actually at Fort Hood, Texas. And they
went to Germany this past summer. Part of their
activities. So we did seek overseas assignments.
We had some pretty exotic assignments, all right.
Our two utility detachments were at,
were in Arkansas. when the big Vietnam refugee
group came in, Fort Chaffee, Arkansas. So we
actually performed, about a month before the
arrival of these refugees, we performed exactly
the same kind of duties that those utility
detachments would on mobilization. That is, we
prepared housing, put in plumbing, reactivated
some of the old facilities at Fort Chaffee. Got
involved in rehabilitation of the whole sewage
disposal system up there. Exactly the same sort of
duties the soldiers would have been doing. You
prepared the camp then for the refugees. That's
right, sure did. Did you? We assisted them, of
course. Sure, there were others. There was an
active army engineer battalion down there too. As
a matter of fact, they used a lot of our equipment.
After we left, the equipment stayed there. one of
the battalions of the 101st Airborne Division was
there using our equipment and working on certain
aspects of the post to ready that for the Vietnam
refugees. Now that was under your command. Did you
visit Port Chaffee? Of course. I stayed there. Our
headquarters was there for two or three years. So
you stayed there during when the refugees were
incoming? Yes. Can you tell me, that's a rather
important historical event, can you tell me about
that? Well they... What were their conditions and
what were the people like? Well the refugees were
crowded into army barracks there, but that was so
much better than they'd been in that they were
appreciated very much. because we've had some
demonstration by Cubans up there in the same
facilities this year, and apparently some of
those Cubans were not the most desirable kind of
people. But as far as I know, there was never any
problem with any of the Vietnamese. They were
crowded. They were uncomplaining about living in
the old World War II type wooden barracks. Of
course, they had full medical support from the
Army hospital there. And of course, there were a
number of births. And gosh, I've forgotten.
There's somewhere between 5,000 and 10,000 of
those refugees there. During all the time they
were there, they were fairly well restricted to
barracks area. This area was, of course,
accessible to us during working hours as we worked
on facilities, but off limits. And of course, the
Vietnamese were carefully contained in these
areas at the time.
They appeared to be healthy enough and
seemed very happy to be over here. How about
schooling? Was there an effort made to teach them
English or anything like that? I'm not sure about
that. I know that The active army people there had
programs going on with guns, I'm not aware of what
it was. How about food? This is an oriental now,
eating American food, is that right? They were
eating? Yes, they were. How'd they adjust to that?
They seemed to be very, very well.
There's such a variety of food.
taken care of on food in the army that there just
wasn't any problem with that. I'm sure that they
adjusted the ration some, the increased supply of
rice or that sort of thing to adjust as much as they
could to the previous diet of the Vietnamese.
However, I think they took to American diets
fairly well too. Now you said they were happy to be
here. Did you say that because they seemed
friendly and smiled a lot, they were a good
disposition, or why? Well,
Orientals are somewhat inscrutable. They don't
smile a lot, apparently, but of course they, in
this particular group of people, there were a lot
of high-class professional people. They seemed
to have well-recognized leaders who interacted
with the military personnel. They seemed to be
well-disciplined and that is that they were quite
cooperative.
So those were characteristics I noted, not any
great expression of exuberance or happiness or
demonstrativeness like we might expect of the
same age people, Americans. How about the
relations between the Arkansas people and the
Vietnamese? Well there were actually no
interactions at that time at all. As I say, at that
time the Vietnamese were brought in there by air to
the near nearby air base, they were brought into
this compound
and restricted to it. Of course, early on they did
start relocating these refugees to places that
wanted them. Houston or Dallas or wherever. Those
arrangements seemed to go quite well.
And of course, as we got into Fort Smith, Arkansas
and around, it did stimulate business there. For
instance, the post engineer went into Fort Smith
and bought every hammer he could find anywhere to
outfit all the people that started
rehabilitating the quarters around Fort
Chaffee. So there was a lot of local purchase of
different things. How did your men perform under
your command at Fort Jaffe? Outstanding. Both of
my utility detachments received very high
ratings for what they did. Now you see, they
normally would have been living in these same
barracks, or my whole organization might have
been in there. But during this time, we were living
in tents. We were not provided quarters as good as
the Vietnamese refugees were. But our men very
willingly worked long hours and were dedicated to
doing the job. Was it because their quarters
weren't as good? Did you think they were
resentful? No, not at all. They knew it was a
temporary thing with them of course. They had
lived in tents before. Well-led,
well-disciplined troops don't mind such things
as that. How many men were there on these two
detachments? The utility detachments have about
50 people in each detachment. And how much time did
you spend up there? Well, each time the utility
detachment was there, if I was the only one there, I
would usually visit for one day or two days to look
over all their projects.